# DiffAE Finetuning with Paired Live/Fixed data

## Creating the dataset
1. To maintain compatibility with the zarrs for inference, we need to create a `MultiDimImageDataset` that references a csv containing paths to images with two channels - one for the aligned live data and one for the aligned fixed data. Running `uv run cellsmap/model_features/paired_data_validation.py` will align the live and fixed data, creating a csv file named with the pattern `aligned_<fixed_dataset_name>_vs_aligned_<live_dataset_name>.csv`. This will have two columns - `fixed` and `moving`. The `moving` images refer to the fixed images, while the `fixed` column refers to the live images. The script `generate_dataset.py` will combine and standard dev project these images into the two channel images that can be used for training. If you have an intended train/test split, you can split the `dataset.csv` file into two new csvs in the same folder named `train.csv` and `val.csv`. Otherwise, you can set `--split True`. By default, all paired datasets are used for finetuning. You can also specify a subset by passing a list of directories to check for images.
2. The config used for training the original DiffAE must be modified to accomodate finetuning with paired images. An example is [here](https://production.int.allencell.org/mlflow/#/experiments/541/runs/a5b6274c683948b5a3e6ef892b0c88d5/artifacts). Note that the data transforms have been changed to reflect the 2d inputs created by `generate_dataset.py`. The following changes should be made to this config:
- `model.save_dir`, `trainer.default_root_dir`, and `callbacks.model_checkpoint.dirpath` should be set to a new path for all model outputs
- `train_dataloaders.dataset.csv_path` and `val_dataloaders.dataset.csv_path` should be changed to the csvs created in step 1.
- `checkpoint.ckpt_path` should be set to the DiffAE checkpoint path to finetune. `checkpoint.weights_only` should be set to `True` to prevent loading of model training metadata. `checkpoint.strict` should be set to `False` to allow for loading of the DiffAE model with a different config.
3. The model can now be trained in an environment with both `cellsmap` and `cyto-dl` installed. In the `cyto-dl` directory, run `python cyto_dl/train.py -cp <path_to_config_folder> -cn train.yaml`. Once this model has been trained, add its mlflow run id to `model_config.yaml`.
